.NET 10 Preview 4 - Runtime (#9874)
dotnet/core: release-notes/10.0/preview/preview4/runtime.md

- [What's new in .NET 10](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/whats-new/dotnet-10/overview) documentation

## Escape Analysis for Local Struct Fields

> Preview 4 expands the JIT compiler's escape analysis abilities to model references to objects from struct fields. As mentioned in prior release notes, the JIT performs escape analysis to determine if an object can outlive its parent method; if it cannot, the JIT can allocate it on the stack, removing the overhead of placing and tracking an object on the heap. Objects can "escape," for example, by being assigned to a non-local variable, or by being passed to or returned from a function that isn't eventually inlined by the JIT. Consider the former case via the following example:
> 

Reviewer: I found "the former case" confusing. I think the text after the example is sufficiently descriptive.

```suggestion
Preview 4 expands the JIT compiler's escape analysis abilities to model references to objects from struct fields. As mentioned in prior release notes, the JIT performs escape analysis to determine if an object can outlive its parent method; if it cannot, the JIT can allocate it on the stack, removing the overhead of placing and tracking an object on the heap. Objects can "escape," for example, by being assigned to a non-local variable, or by being passed to or returned from a function that isn't eventually inlined by the JIT.

Consider the following example:

```

       ret
```

Note the call to `CORINFO_HELP_NEWARR_1_VC` to allocate `x` on the heap, indicating it was marked as escaping. Thanks to [dotnet/runtime #113977](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/113977), the JIT will no longer mark objects referenced by local struct fields as escaping, so long as the struct in question does not escape. The assembly now looks like this:

```asm
Program:Main():int (FullOpts):
       sub      rsp, 56
       vxorps   xmm8, xmm8, xmm8
       vmovdqu  ymmword ptr [rsp], ymm8
       vmovdqa  xmmword ptr [rsp+0x20], xmm8
       xor      eax, eax
       mov      qword ptr [rsp+0x30], rax
       mov      rax, 0x7F9FC16F8CC8      ; int[]
       mov      qword ptr [rsp], rax
       lea      rax, [rsp]
       mov      dword ptr [rax+0x08], 10
       lea      rax, [rsp]
       mov      eax, dword ptr [rax+0x10]
       add      rsp, 56
       ret

```

Note the heap allocation helper call is gone. To learn more about de-abstraction improvements planned for .NET 10, check out [dotnet/runtime #108913](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/108913).

## Inlining Improvements

Preview 4 brings multiple enhancements to the JIT's inliner:

> * [dotnet/runtime #112998](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/112998) enabled inlining of methods with exception handling semantics, like try-catch blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [dotnet/runtime #112998](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/112998) enabled inlining of some methods with exception handling semantics, in particular those with try-finally blocks.
```
